---
layout: post
title: Pretrospective on the failure of my B2D
description: Niches get stitches
author: 🔮 Abe Winter
new: true
---

WTF is B2D? If you're one of the 3 readers of this blog who know me in real life, you know that I'm starting a progress bar company. I learned this week that this category is called B2D -- B2B businesses that sell directly to developers / tech people.

Given the [inevitability of failure here](https://youtu.be/thbICk05yPk?t=124) and my deep inner need to attract negative feedback online, I thought it would be productive to write the postmortem of the business now, a few weeks before launch.

To really get myself in the mindset I'm writing this in past tense.

## Reasons it failed

**OSS will replicate this if it's useful**. Or a common variant: a bigger player will build this in a weekend *after* it starts to succeed and eat your lunch, or buy you at wholesale after competing a little. Cloud vendors, stats vendors and the splunk clones are all capable of this. 'I'm small enough that it's easier to buy me than copy me' wasn't a good moat.

**Your potential clients all already have in-house versions of this**. Every sales call I made ended with [he's already got one, you see](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DGXx56WqqJw). And their progress bars are better-integrated with their app, both API-wise and visually (see 'graphic design' below).

**Your graphic design is not the best**. Preach.

**Developers don't spend money**. See 'in-house' above.

**Costs too much**. And / or: you didn't charge enough. Crazily, given how price elasticity works in a market used to freemium, it can be both at once!

**Unclear value prop**. I sat somewhere between tracing and logging for the developer market, and the B2D2C version of my product doesn't matter because end-user value doesn't matter to in-house buyers at corporations.

**You're not as smart as you think you are**. I.e. I didn't construct a good enough argument for why this should exist. See also 'value prop' above and 'market fit research' below.

**You misunderstood the market size**. I thought success was far away [but actually it was just small](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MMiKyfd6hA0). Or I didn't do enough product/market fit research before committing to a spec. Or this will never grow large / fast enough to attract funding.

**You'll never make more than your salary**. Given where developer salaries are at, I could have invested this time in getting a maximally overpaid day job in my sector and used the extra dough to gas up my champagne-fueled outdoor shower.

**You should have raised money**. Given the different dimensions on which I needed to compete with established players (scalability, look and feel, breadth of product offering). Also consider the related problem, I didn't show fast enough growth to raise money.

**You blew up your career**. Nobody wants to hire a mid-career tools / scalability dev who spent the last 6 months building a tool that didn't scale. (See 'didn't scale' below).

**Your architecture won't scale you moron**. After initial success / demand, I couldn't get past N users / M messages per second. New customers stopped joining, loyal ones decamped, and eventually a larger player built this as a feature.

## I'm launching anyway

If it succeeds I'll get to write a cool rebuttal and if it fails I get to say I told you so. Wish me luck and [sign up for the waitlist](https://cloudprogress.io) for god's sake.
