---
layout: post
title: Healthy and unhealthy debate in product design
description: Trust me, the grass isn't greener
noindex: true
author: Abe Winter
---

> THIS IS AN UNPUBLISHED DRAFT. If you come across it, please don't publish the link yet.

Debate is great. It surfaces information to decision-makers, it helps people to feel heard, and when it's effective, it brings the participants closer to a meeting of the minds. Sometimes it even leads to better outcomes.

But people are seldom right when we say things, especially off the dome. We exaggerate, misremember, misstate, misinterpret, and guess.

Even when I'm 'right', I'm still choosing one option of several without testing the other options. We're taking one of what Terry Pratchett calls the 'trouser legs of history', which means we're not taking the other, which means that claims of optimality are really hard to test.

So when I'm right I can still be less right than someone else. And because organizations resist deviance from what managers think will work, it's tough to do fair "I told you so" in a hierarchical setting.

The outcome of acting on these decisions is often okay, because good outcomes come from work and experimentation, not from any single debate in a room. But the cost of debate is large, especially if it leads to delays in executing on a strategy, changes to a spec, or takes up time that could be spent surfacing real information and making real decisions.

This article is my attempt to encode what's worked for me on healthy teams: a debate structure that follows the phases of delivering a product.

1. toc
{:toc}

## Debate & project structure

Consider the broad phases of a project:

stage | main question
---|---
Design | **What** to build to achieve your broad parameters
Implementation | **How** to translate the spec a reality
Delivery | **Whether** the project is ready to release
Feedback | What next

Each phase has a different kind of objection that you'd want to hear. Example:

> This explodes when heated to body temperature

That's a valid objection at the delivery phase of a baby pacifier. The cost of putting those on the market is higher than the cost of scrapping the project or adding another iteration cycle.

Here's another:

> Wrong color

'Wrong color' *isn't* a good objection at delivery. The cost of changing is likely high (you've already made them). There may not be evidence for the claim, for example 'we think it won't sell because it's a different color than our competitors'.

'Wrong color' is a great objection at the design stage. It can be a good objection at the implementation stage, depending on why. For example, 'we've discovered that blue pigment is cheaper than pink pigment' is a real implementation reason, it's new information, and it can be factored into a revenue model.

Phases 1 and 4 are the cheapest times to make a big change. The feedback phase is often a cheaper place to change something than the delivery stage. Unless something is actively broken, just get it out the door. Free up your resources to their next project, and make your change in context of how the product does on the market.

## What is debate for

Debate *isn't* always for what you'd think, meaning deciding what to build or how to build it. Those are creative processes; they happen behind doors and after-hours. They happen on the toilet. They happen as people think of new solutions while solving repeat problems.

That doesn't mean you can skip the argument and still execute well. Debate *is* for getting buy-in from the team, both moral 'should we' and technical 'can we'.

In particular, debate surfaces specs to subject matter experts. SMEs can tell you what parts of your org and technology will be touched by a project. They'll raise deal-breakers as early as possible, and they can increase the odds that your time & resource estimation is ballpark.

Surfacing specs to SMEs also saves them from getting surprised later and dragging their feet. Surfacing specs to senior managers (and getting sign-off) prevents them (sometimes) from getting cold feet later and delaying critical work late in the game.

## Enforcing process forces teams to write good specs

Here's an argument everyone has had:

1. It's too late in the game to make this change
1. Okay, but I'm the expert and I didn't totally understand what was happening with this project
1. Okay, but you're not just breaking this project, you're delaying all our other work
1. Okay, but this project is more important than anything else we're working on

What these conversations come down to is two things:

* Imagination deficit: Prioritizing objections to what's in your face over less visible other work
* Process deficit: Experts or managers who haven't mastered process to the extent that they can make it predictable for a team

You have to stick to the spec and reject late changes wherever possible. It makes things better long-term.

I don't know if this is *empowering* teams to live with their choices or forcing them to; it depends on your perspective. Either way, this is how you make delivery predictable -- by incentivizing experts et al to surface problems early and focus early when the cost of change is rockin robin, i.e. cheap.

Reliable process matters more than any single project because people can't plan their work without it. Blocking delivery to change a spec, aside from being a hit-or-miss investment in itself, makes this project more expensive as well as every subsequent project, and alienates your most experienced ICs.

## Prefer the devil you know

Fight for predictable process with clear delegation, clear channels of communication, clear roles, and informed, available leaders. It allows you to get better over time.

Don't trust surprise changes. They come from a bad place.

'Bird in hand' arguments are wise and usually right -- not liking what you've got doesn't mean you can easily find a better replacement.

And don't panic when a project has gone off the rails. You can't fix these problems while they're going on. Fight through to deliver and set ground rules for next time.

{% include flatpixel.html tag="debate" %}
